all it would take for natural selection
to make a comeback in the developed
world would be a lethal contagious
disease we may be in control for the
time being but viruses and bacteria
don't stay the same
they evolve too
[Music]
so our future is inextricably linked to
what happens to them professor andry
weed has been studying a deadly virus it
affects chickens not humans but it has
worrying implications for our future
so especially thing to realize is that
we're not alone now I think we tend to
imagine that evolution is us against the
environment but there's a lot of ongoing
arms races between different species as
they evolve and change the world of each
other in their laboratories Andrew and
his team are trying to understand what
made the virus evolve to see what it can
tell us about our own future
[Music]
so what can these chickens tell us about
diseases and human populations I think
one of the lessons of the poultry
industry has been that when you change
things radically the diseases that are
in them often change radically as well
it's very hard to imagine that the cause
of this evolution was not something to
do with the intensification and the
commercialization of the chicken
industry and Andrew has a surprising
theory about why the virus evolved in
such a dangerous way the most popular
hypothesis at least the one that's most
of the work is going on and what we're
interested in is the possibility that
vaccinating the chickens against the
virus has done this the chickens have
actually caused the virus to change yes
if you keep the birds alive with
vaccines that allows a much longer
transmission period keeps the birds
going much longer to the virus although
it's very very hot is not killing the
bird anymore because the vaccine
stopping there so that allows it to
transmit in a way that it wouldn't have
done in a previous in era I think this
is really interesting because it shows
quite clearly this we can assume this
with somehow removing ourselves from
natural selection by using medicine to
to deal with disease but actually what
we're doing is just changing the kind of
the Selective landscape out there yeah I
as a disease evolutionary biologist I
don't feel like I'm about to go into
work the things are always changing so I
mean just take drug resistance bacteria
that we thought we had under control
lots of them now are becoming multi
drug-resistant there are some bacteria
now that can't be killed by drugs no and
drugs that wouldn't also kill us but the
viruses evolution might also be due to
modern factory farming with vast numbers
of chickens packed in closely together
it's a change in the chickens habitats
the mirrors are owned increasingly
urbanized world so do you think that
pathogens like viruses and bacteria will
always be there in our environment
shaping our evolution they're always
going to be there how they shape human
evolution is going to be very
interesting there's not going to be a
day where we declare the war on
infectious disease over that is not
going to have
with the work of people like Andrew we
may be able to at least keep on top of
infectious disease for a while but it's
hard to imagine that we'll always be in
control
you